---
title: "Alternate tunings examples (rock)"
excerpt: >
  Details on the non-standard tunings used by Jimi Hendrix, Stevie Ray Vaughan 
  as well as Led Zeppelin (in Kashmir).
header:
  teaser: https://www.accordersaguitare.com/img/guitare-folk-veste-cuir_300.jpg
  overlay_color: "#000"
  overlay_filter: "0.5"
  overlay_image: https://www.accordersaguitare.com/img/guitare-folk-veste-cuir.jpg
---

In today's article I'll be going over famous alternate tunings used by guitar 
players such as [Jimi Hendrix][hendrix], [Stevie Ray Vaughan][srv], as well as 
[Jimmy Page][page] from Led Zeppelin, in the tune Kashmir.

## Jimi Hendrix's tuning

Jimi Hendrix was a legendary guitar player with a terrific sound that could be 
identified in just a few notes. Fourty years after his first hits, many guitar 
players still admire him and try to learn his tunes as well as get closer to 
his tone.

It is worth mentioning here than on top of being a left-hander (but playing on 
regular right-handed guitars), Hendrix used to play in Eb tuning, which is 
different to the standard E tuning. He started tuning so early in his career 
due to the fact that he was playing in rhythm and blues clubs with horn 
players, and those tend to play tunes in the keys of Eb or Bb most of the time.

Eb tuning is fairly similar to standard tuning, since they are in fact the same 
tuning, with a semitone difference. To tune a guitar in Eb, simply lower each 
string by a semitone, which would give:

- E flat (low E)
- A flat
- D flat
- G flat
- B flat
- E flat (high E)

### Example song

{% include video id="03yPUlBE5OU" provider="youtube" %}

### Stevie Ray Vaughan

A huge Hendrix fan, Stevie Ray Vaughan also liked to play in E flat tuning. But 
'SRV' even took it further: he's also gone for very thick strings (13-58 vs. 
standard 10-46), which helped him reach his beefy sound.

#### Example song

{% include video id="0vo23H9J8o8" provider="youtube" %}

### Be careful!

When switching your guitar to a new tuning, you're changing the force being 
applied by the strings on the neck. If you're only going to occasionally switch 
from E standard tuning to E flat tuning, then that might be fine; but if you're 
looking to keep a new tuning in the long run, then check that with a guitar 
tech who'll let you know if your neck should be adjusted for that.

## Jimmy Page's tuning in the song Kashmir

Jimmy Page is one of the top guitar players from the 70's; he was sought after 
in London studios, known as one of the 10 best guitar players in the world, and 
founding member of one of the most known rock bands: Led Zeppelin. In Kashmir, 
one of the band's most iconic songs, it is the guitar riff's exotic power that 
give the song such an edge.

### Procedure

In order to tune a guitar to play Kashmir, follow these steps:

- lower the low E string till it's a D. It should sound the same as the 4th 
string.
- do the same but with the high E string,
- lower the B string to A.

The final result is the following, from the lowest string to the highest:

- D
- A
- D
- G
- A
- D

### A bit of music theory

This tuning is called Dsus4 open. A tuning is said to be open when a particular 
chord can be played by simply strumming the open strings. In this case, Dsus4. 
But in fact *any* sus4 chord could be played with a bar chord at other frets: 
Esus4 at the 2nd fret (`222222`), Fsus4 at the 3rd fret (`333333`), etc.

A chord is said to be sus4 when it has a fourth and a fifth, but no third. With 
Dsus4, the notes are: D (tonic), G (fourth) and A (fifth); which are indeed the 
notes of the open strings!

### Example song

{% include video id="sfR_HWMzgyc" provider="youtube" %}

[hendrix]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jimi_Hendrix
[srv]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stevie_Ray_Vaughan
[page]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jimmy_Page
