---
title: "Acoustic vs. electric guitar: which to pick?"
excerpt: >
  Let's look at which instrument to pick when starting to learn guitar, as well 
  as the differences between classical, steel-string and electric guitars.
header:
  teaser: https://www.accordersaguitare.com/img/differentes-guitares_300.jpg
  overlay_color: "#000"
  overlay_filter: "0.5"
  overlay_image: https://www.accordersaguitare.com/img/differentes-guitares.jpg
---

Among the most frequent questions that newcomers to the instrument ask when 
they're starting out, are the two following:

- should I learn to play on an electric or acoustic guitar?
- should I really learn to play with an acoustic guitar eventhough I plan on 
playing an electric guitar in the end?

Choosing the right guitar is crucial in that it will have an influence on how 
eager you are to practice your new instrument in the first months. Since this 
period is when most people quit, it is important to be motivated enough to go 
through obstacles.

There's many different types of guitars (some of them even are hybrids), but, 
put simply, there are two main categories:

- acoustic guitars
- electric guitars

The main difference is that acoustic guitars are made of a hollow body that 
amplifies the sound produced by the strings, whereas electric guitars must be 
paired with an amplifier.

## Acoustic guitars

Acoustic guitars can again be split into two main categories:

- steel-string guitars,
- nylon string guitars.

Steel-string guitars generally have a larger body, made out of bright, 
yellowish wood. Most importantly, they use steel strings, which produce a 
sharp, metallic sound. Classical guitars also have three steel strings (the 
three low strings), but the three highs are made out of nylon, which have a 
mellow sound. Genres of music played on those two types of guitars include 
classical music and latin music for classical guitars; rock, pop or blues for 
steel-string guitars.

{% include figure alt="A steel-string guitar" caption="A steel-string guitar" 
image_path="https://www.accordersaguitare.com/img/guitare-folk.jpg" %}

Here's how an acoustic guitar sounds:

{% include audio.html file="folk" %}

{% include figure alt="A classical guitar" caption="A classical guitar"
image_path="https://www.accordersaguitare.com/img/guitare-classique.jpg" %}

Here's how a classical guitar sounds:

{% include audio.html file="classique" %}

(Please note that there are multiple guitars playing at once in this clip.)

## Electric guitars

Electric guitars have a full body that's paired with an electronic setup made 
of pickups that are located below the strings in order to capture the signal. 
They also feature tone and volume knobs. Played on their own, they're really 
quiet. A guitar player might be able to hear himself if he plays in a quiet 
room, but this isn't the sound anybody is looking for. The sound will have to 
be amplified, and the amp plays a big role in the final tone.

Sound effects such as reverberation, distortion, chorus, etc. can also be added 
to an electric guitar's sound, which allows for great flexibility. Electric 
guitars can by the way be heard in all genres: rock, pop, funk, metal, jazz, 
etc.

Electric guitars have thinner strings and necks, and so this is less demanding 
of a beginner player's hand. It hurts less. That being said, the various 
settings that can be made on the instrument and on the amplifier can be very 
confusing when starting out.

{% include figure alt="An electric guitar" caption="An electric guitar"
image_path="https://www.accordersaguitare.com/img/guitare-electrique.jpg" %}

Here's how an electric guitar sounds:

{% include audio.html file="electrique" %}

## Final words

At the end of the day, you should mostly think about what genre of music you 
like the most, and get the kind of guitar that is used to play that music. Then 
you'll truly enjoy the process, and difficulties won't bring you to a halt. If 
you're on a budget, an acoustic guitar might be a good choice considering that 
there's no amp nor cables to buy on top of the guitar. Good luck!
