---
title: "Tune other common instruments"
excerpt: >
  Guide on how to tune a ukulele, a bass, a violin, a cello or a piano with an 
  online tuner.
header:
  teaser: https://www.accordersaguitare.com/img/touches-piano_300.jpg
  overlay_color: "#000"
  overlay_filter: "0.5"
  overlay_image: https://www.accordersaguitare.com/img/touches-piano.jpg
---

Although it is mostly guitar players who visit this website, the tuner can be 
used with most other common instruments. Here are a few possible variations of 
Tune That Guitar.

## Tune a bass

A bass guitar's tuning is the same as that of a guitar. There are two 
differences, though. The first is that the bass guitar, as its name implies, is 
an instrument whose range is low. It might therefore be more difficult for the 
tuner to pick up exactly which note is being played, and you might have to use 
your ear to polish the tuning after you use the tuner. Especially on the low 
strings.

The second difference is that a regular bass guitar only has four strings while 
a guitar generally has six. E standard tuning (EADGBe) becomes *EADG*: the same 
tuning as on a guitar, minus the two high strings.

{% include figure alt="A man playing electric bass" caption="An electric bass" 
image_path="https://www.accordersaguitare.com/img/homme-basse.jpg"%}

## Tune a ukulele

The ukulele can be tuned like guitars or bass guitars, with mechanics at the 
top of the neck to tune each individual string. The ukulele standard tuning is 
*GCEA*. The main difference with a guitar's tuning is that the first string, G, 
is higher than C and E; unlike on a guitar where strings go from low to high. 
This ukulele tuning is called *re-entrant tuning*, and it is the standard, but 
there's also different options depending on the style and tunes you're looking 
to play.

{% include figure alt="A woman playing ukulele" caption="A ukulele" 
image_path="https://www.accordersaguitare.com/img/femme-ukulele.jpg" %}

## Tune a violin or cello

Producing a pleasant sound out of a violin is not something that's easy to 
achieve, especially when the violin's not in tune! To get the instrument in 
tune, though, works like on a guitar: you tweak the mechanics. Except there 
might be two on a violin: one on the neck, but another at the bridge. If you're 
only going to do a small change, then use the knob at the bridge. For larger 
changes, use the mechanics on the neck. Do not put too much pressure, though, 
otherwise the string might just break! The notes that we're looking for are 
**GDAE** for the violin and **CGDA** for the cello.

{% include figure alt="A woman playing violin" caption="A violin" 
image_path="https://www.accordersaguitare.com/img/femme-violon.jpg" %}

## Tune a piano

It is generally a bad idea for somebody who doesn't have past experience with 
the instrument to try to tune a piano on his own. Although the pitch is also a 
matter of strings under pressure, upright and grand pianos are way more complex 
to handle. First of all, a dedicated tool is required to twist the mechanic. 
But then, it is not only six strings you're looking at, but 88 notes, with one 
to three strings per note! It might even be, depending on the piano's 
condition, that it would be impossible to get it to match A440 in one try, and 
that it would have to be done in multiple smaller steps. This is the reason why 
professional piano technicians have to learn the job in school and charge for 
their service. They have an experimented ear and can feel how the instrument's 
going to react.

{% include figure alt="Un homme qui joue un piano à queue" caption="Un piano à 
queue" image_path="https://www.accordersaguitare.com/img/homme-piano.jpg" %}
